IPA illustration of Northern Tosk
================

This is the GitHub repository of the project *IPA illustration of
Northern Tosk*.

## Directory structure

-   `docs/`: contains project documentation.
    -   The file `procedure.md` documents data acquisition and
        processing in detail.
-   `code/`: contains code for data (pre-)processing, organised in the
    following sub-directories.
    -   `config/`: configuration script for setting up the EMU-SDMS
        database.
    -   `praat/`: Praat scripts for data-preprocessing.
    -   `r/`: R scripts for data transformation, wrangling, and
        plotting.
-   `img/`: figures generated by `code/prepare_plots.Rmd`.
-   `renv/`: R package library managed by the renv R package.

## Data

The data of this project is version-controlled with
[dvc](https://dvc.org). A separate `dvc` repository—which is independent
from this `git` repository—holds the data, and the `data.dvc` file,
which is instead versioned by `git`, enables data transfer to and from
the `dvc` repository. Due to server limitations at the hosting
institution, we cannot grant access to the `dvc` repository, and we
instead make the data available as an archive (which also includes the
contents of this GitHub repository) on the Open Science Framework (TBA).

The archive contains the directories of this GitHub repository and the
`data` directory with the project data. The `data` directory contains
the following sub-directories:

-   `metadata/`: metadata files.
-   `stimuli/`: contains the list of words (`word-list.txt`) and
    randomised versions of this list (`rand-1:6.txt`).
-   `recordings/`: raw and derived recordings, used for forced-alignment
    and acoustic analysis.
    -   `raw/`: raw (original) `.wav` recordings with accompanying
        `.TextGrids` used for chunking the recordings into separate
        parts.
    -   `derived/`
        -   `align/`: files generated by the forced-alignment procedure.
        -   `post-align/`: post-alignment files, imported into the EMU
            database `alb-ipa_emuDB/`. To avoid data duplication, this
            folder is not version-controlled, so it doesn’t ship with
            this repository.
        -   `illustr/`: illustrative recordings of `consonants/`,
            `vowels/`, `intonation/`, and *The North Wind and the Sun*.
-   `alb-ipa_emuDB/`: EMU-SDMS database.
-   `ultrasound/`: spline data from ultrasound tongue imaging.
-   `varia/`: a miscellanea folder with files used with different
    services.

## Data collection and processing

Data collection and processing are documented in `docs/procedure.md`.

## Directory tree

    ## .
    ## ├── code
    ## │   ├── config
    ## │   ├── praat
    ## │   └── r
    ## ├── data
    ## │   ├── alb-ipa_emuDB
    ## │   │   ├── s01_ses
    ## │   │   ├── s02_ses
    ## │   │   ├── s04_ses
    ## │   │   ├── s05_ses
    ## │   │   └── s06_ses
    ## │   ├── dataframes
    ## │   ├── metadata
    ## │   ├── recordings
    ## │   │   ├── derived
    ## │   │   └── raw
    ## │   ├── stimuli
    ## │   ├── ultrasound
    ## │   └── varia
    ## │       ├── qgj-example
    ## │       └── vot-example
    ## ├── docs
    ## ├── img
    ## │   ├── acoustics
    ## │   ├── articulation
    ## │   ├── examples
    ## │   └── ipa-vchart
    ## └── renv
    ##     └── library
    ##         └── R-4.0
